Act One
SCENE ONE

Late afternoon on autumn Friday. 
Jim's study, a comfortably furnished panelled room in Chequers, an English country mansion. It bas a desk, a seating area, double doors (stage right), a smaller door (left) and big windows upstage centre.
Sir Humphrey Appleby and Benard Woolley are waiting. Humpbrey is standing, Benarard is sitting.
Newsreader (0n TV) And now, weather. Severe thunderstorms are forecast ...
Humphrey switches off the TV. Bernard puts down the Evening Standard.
Bernard It's awful, isn't it?
Humphrey What is awful, Bernard?
Bernard Well, all these jobs going. Interest rates. Repossessions. Fear of inflation. Foreclosures.
Humphrey Oh yes. Terrible.
Bernard You don't sound terribly worried, Sir Humphrey.
Humphrey Bernard, I am not being sacked, repossessed, inflated or foreclosed. Neither are you.
Bernard Nor's rhe Prime Minister. But he's worried stiff.
Humphrey So he should be.
Bernard You don't sympathise with him?
Humphrey That's the deal. That's how Prime Ministers' careers go. They get to be on the front page every day for years, which they love. They travel the long parh from euphoric triumph to ignominious failure and then make way for rhe next saviour of rhe nation. It's called democracy.
Bernard It beats me why anyone would want to be Prime Minister.
Humphrey It's the only top job that requires no previous experience, no training, no qualifications and limited intelligence.
Bernard Sir Humphrey ... You do believe in democracy, don't you?
Humphrey Do I, Bernard? Actually no, not as most people understand it. Democracy should nor be about executing the will of the people. It should be the process whereby we secure the consent of the people to the policies of those qualified to decide on their behalf.
Bernard Like who?
Humphrey Like us, Bernard.
Bernard I believe in democracy, Sir Humphrey.
Humphrey It does you credit. And if all the voters were as informed and intelligent as - say - me, or even you, it could possibly work. But that's hardly realistic.
Bernard Well, obviously we have to stop the government making stupid misrakes. If I did everything the Prime lvlinister told me to do, I'd be fired within a week, and rightly so. But I am there to help him.
Humphrey Bernard, we have a leadership crisis in this country. If the government can't or won't exercise it, it falls ro us, whether we want it or not.
Bernard I know. Power abhors a vacuum.

 Humphrey And we are currently led by one. We should exercise power because we have nothing to gain or lose personally: we have respectable salaries, honours, an office and a chauffeur ...
Bernard I haven't got a chauffeur ...
Humphrey You will, Bernard, when you grow up. We end up with an index-linked pension, a bank directorship, a couple of nicely remunerated quangos and a cottage in the Dordogne. So we can be entirely even-handed in our judgements and make them in the public interest.
Bernard Well, things may not seem so bad soon, when we tell the Prime Minister about Kumranistan.
He taps the file on the coffee table. European Central Bank to the rescue.
Humphrey Bernard! Do not mention the ECB co the Prime Minister. You know his views.
Bernard I know he's afraid that Brussels will take away most of his powers.
Humphrey They already have. And so they should. All we need him to do is preside at tonight's dinner, pretend he's read the Kumranistan plan, and leave the rest to us.
Jim Hacker, the Prime Minister; enters right. He is followed by a Driver carrying a pile of five Red Boxes.
Jim Sorry 1'111 late, it's been a terrible day.
Humphrey Any particular reason?
The Driver leaves.
Jim You've read about the Cabinet split?
Humphrey Yes.
Jim You've seen what's happened to the Footsie and the pound?

Humphrey Yes.
Jim So how many particular reasons do you want?
Humphrey Well ...
Jim And now this Lancaster House conference is turning into a catastrophe.
Humphrey It was your idea to convene it, Prime Minister.
Jim Humphrey, if you become President of Europe in the middle of the biggest financial crisis for a generation -
Bernard Um - with respect, Prime Minister, there is a President of the European Union and it's not you. What the UK Government currently has - not you personally - is the Presidency of the European Council.
Jim He's President of the Union, I'm President of the Council.
Humphrey No, Prime Minister, the President of the European Union itself is the Belgian Prime Minister . . .
Jim Who is completely unknown!
Humphrey Well, obviously! He's Belgian.
Jim And not elected. Appointed. In secret! Course, you wouldn't have a problem with that, would you, Humphrey?
Humphrey You do me an injustice. I am all in favour of elections. Provided the right people do the voting. But the difference, as far as you're concerned, is between being head of an empire of five hundred million people and chairing the Council of Ministers for six months.
Jim Humphrey, we were talking about why I convened the conference on this dreadful recession. I had to do something.
Humphrey And the conference was something. So you did it! Well done.
Jim But now it's falling apart, which might just finish me.
Humphrey It may not be falling apart, Prime Minister.
Jim Haven't you been reading the conference reports?
Humphrey I have. Have you?
Jim The spadework wasn't done properly. The Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor let me down badly. Instead of having everything nailed down before they all convened, they left it to chance. Useless! We only just won re-election and they're plotting to get rid of me already!
Bernard 'Forsan miseros meliora sequentur.'
Jim What?
Bernard 'For those in misery, perhaps better things will follow.'
Humphrey Well said, Bernard.
Bernard I didn't actually say that. That was Virgil.
Humphrey I know chat, Bernard.
Bernard At least I did say ir, just now, but not originally.
Humphrey Thank you, Bernard. We get the point.
Jim It was completely predictable: the Krauts don't want a stimulus plan, they're terrified of runaway inflation, that's what destroyed the Weimar Republic and brought them Hitler. The Wops and the Dagoes are up co their armpits in debt already. The Frogs only want it if France gets aII the benefits ...
Bernard (interrupts) Prime Minister, I really think you should stop using these pejorative epithets to describe our allies, they might slip our in public sometime.
Jim Quite right, Bernard. Thank you. And the Micks and the Polacks aren't getting the subsidies they were promised, which they regard as a betrayal. So it's time for me to get hands-on and give some leadership.
Humphrey Good.
Jim So - tell me, what should I do?
Humphrey That's just the kind of leadership we need.
Jim Thank you. Humphrey.
Humphrey And we have good news for you, Prime Minister...
Bernard Late last night we had a breakthrough at Lancaster House. A new player appeared on the scene.
Jim The Americans? Are they coming after all?
Humphrey No, their position is immutable. They won't come to the conference because you wouldn't let them chair it.
Jim I can't let them chair a European conference, Humphrey. Look at the map!
Humphrey It could become an international conference, if that would save the whole European financial system from melting down again.
Jim Don't be silly, Humphrey. I'd lose face.
Humphrey Oh yes, of course. Silly me.
Bernard Prime Minister, Kumranistan has joined us.
Jim Has it? Good.(A beat.) Have I heard of them? 
Humphrey They have oil. Massive new reserves have been found. They're offering a possible ten-trillion-dollar loan to Europe. Secured against future purchases.
Jim But - that could solve everything.
Humphrey Yes.
Jim Save the conference!
Bernard Yes.
Jim Save Europe, in fact! (In his own world.) 'TRIUMPH FOR PRIME MINISTER!' 'VICTORY FOR RESIDENT OF EUROPE!'
Humphrey With respect ...
Jim (firmly) Victory for a President of Europe, Humphrey. 
Bernard It might even save your job.
Jim My job's perfectly safe. Other people have survived with small majorities. Wilson had a majority of four in 1964. He lasted six years.
Humphrey I was never awfully good sums but - um, four would be exactly double the size of your majority, am I right?
Jim So?
Humphrey He had to fight a second election pretty soon, to get a working majority.
Bernard And Wilson had hair.
Jim (dangerously) What are you saying, Bernard?
Bernard Nothing. Only that... well, no Prime Minister or US President has been elected without a full head of hair since Eisenhower or Churchill in the 1950s. So I'm, um, saying that you did magnificently to win a majority of two.
Jim (bitterly) Thad hair when I was first elected. I lost my hair in the service of my country.
Humphrey The Kumranisran deal may solve your problems.
Jim Fine. Where do I sign?
Humphrey We're not quite there yet. They want something in exchange.
Bernard You know where Kumranistan is?
Jim Yes. (A beat.) Well, sort of. You know, over there.
Bernard It lies in Turkestan, north of Kazakstan, Uzbekistan, and Afghanisran. (Goes to a globe.) Here, in fact.
Jim As I said. Exactly.
Humphrey They had been planning to take their oil to Europe through the Soviet pipeline.
Jim They're not Soviets any more, Humphrey. They haven't been Soviets for twenty years.
Humphrey They still are in spirit, and always will be.
Bernard The, um, Russians want a pretty huge payment - 
Humphrey Which Kumranistan doesn't want to pay, since the Soviets will have their hands on the pipeline tap.
Bernard So, with a little prompting from us: Plan B! A pipeline through Turkey, Greece and southern Europe, avoiding Russia altogether.
Humphrey What they need is European agreement. And that's what they're prepared to lend us ten trillion dollars for.
Jim Why?
Humphrey They want the guarantee of future oil purchases by everyone in the EU.
Jim (a beat) I don't get it.
Humphrey It's awfully simple, Prime Minister. Kumranistan will lend Europe the money to buy Kumranistan's oil.
Jim And Europe borrows another ten trillion? More debt?
Humphrey It's not a problem, it doesn't have to be repaid for years. We get the money now, interest free, and we repay it in the future when we buy the oil that we'll need anyway.
Jim So where do they make their money?
Humphrey We'll pay a premium on the oil. But that's not for many years.
Jim Are all the Europeans on board?
Humphrey They are. And the problems are what we' ve been negotiating, as you will have seen in your Red Boxes.
Jim Yes. Um - remind me.
Humphrey Well, as you'll doubtless remember, the Turks refused ro cooperate unless they were admitted to the European Community. I see their point. I've always had
a soft spot for Johnny Turk.
Jim Johnny Turk? (Sniggers.) You're on first-name terms, then?
Humphrey (laughs mirthlessly) Very droll, Prime Minister. Turkey is an important ally, the only Muslim country with a secular democracy. We need -
Jim (interrupting) - Johnny Turk, yes.
Bernard Germany, France and Italy were against the plan on principle.
Jim What changed their minds?
Humphrey A ten-trillion-dollar loan.
Bernard That surprised me, Sir Humphrey. Surely, if a principle was involved ...?
Humphrey I think you'll find ten trillion dollars is a bit above the going rate for principles in the EU, Bernard.
Jim What was the principle?
Humphrey They don't like Muslims.
Jim Oh. Ah.
Bernard Anyway, everything is agreed. Eve.ryone gets a share in the construction. 
Bernard unfurls a big wall map. It shows an absurd zig-zag pipeline route through Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia, Hungary; Slovakia, Czecb Republic, Austria, Croatia, Italy, Spain, France, Germany and all points north.
Bernard Here's the route. That helped, of course,
Jim We're saved! But why didn't I know about all this?
Humphrey It's top secret.
Jim Good God, Humphrey, I'm the Prime Minister!
Humphrey (soothing) I know, Prime Minister, and what an excellent Prime Minister you are! But it had to be kept under wraps. If it had leaked this week, money markets would have gone mad...
Jim I' see. Well... is that everything I need to know?
Bernard There's one other thing.
Humphrey (warning) Bernard ...
Jim gives Humphrey an inquiring look.
Bernard A power group in Kumranisran still wants the Russian route.
Humphrey Ah. (Relaxes.) Yes, Bernard's right, they don't want to upset the Soviets. It's understandable, they share a border. But the Kumranisrani Foreign Secretary has come over here to put the deal to us if we want it.
Jim Invite him to dinner! Tonight!
Bernard I did, Prime Minister.
Humphrey (slowly, patiently) That's why we're here.
Jim And he can do the deal? Now?
Humphrey He has the authority. But he needs careful handling, they're very sensitive about respect.
Jim I know, those Middle-Eastern types... (Chuckles) So insecure, always so worried abour losing face. (Catches himself) Though sometimes, of course, that's perfectly reasonable. But you get an awful lot of respect for ten trillion dollars. He can have all of mine, for a start.
Humphrey Excellent, Prime Minister.
He exits. Bernard is following.
Jim Bernard.
Bernard Yes, Prime Minister?
Jim There's something you're not happy about. What is it?
Bernard Oh. Um ... um ... I'm not sure I can - 
Jim Spit it out, Bernard.
Bernard Um-'Timeo Danos et dona ferentes...'
Jim looks blank.
Bernard 'I fear the Greeks, especially when they bring gifts.' . . . Remember the Trojan Horse, Prime Minister.
He exits. Jimthi11ks a moment; gets out his BlackBerry and dials.
Jim Clarie? you at Chequers yet?... Come to my study please... Now!
He rings off, hurries to the pile of Red Boxes, removes the top four and opens the lowest box. He digs out a file from near the bottom. Opens it and starts to read. There is a knock at the other door.
Come in.
Claire enters. She is in her late thirties, attractive and intelligent.
Jim Ah. Claire. There's something I don't know about this pipeline plan. What is it that Humphrey isn't telling me? Bernard was blathering about Trojan Horses.
Claire That's interesting. Must be the pipeline mechanics.
Jim I don't care about the mechanics, I'm not an engineer.
Claire Fiscal mechanics, Jim. Financial engineering. Perhaps Humphrey has arranged for the proposed loan to go through the European Central Bank, and isn't mentioning it.
Jim Is that important?
Claire Yes. What if it's set up so that if we want any of the loan we'll have ro join the euro?
Jim We can't join the euro! It would be a catastrophe! Hand over control of interest rates? Control of exchange rates? Control of money supply? When I need to inflate to get re-elected, the ECB might deflate because of German price rises and I could get kicked out!
Claire Candidly, I'm not sure if that would bother Sir Humphrey.
Jim And then there's Greece! And Portugal! They could drag down our recovery!
Claire What recovery?
Jim (picks up phone) Bernard, tell Sir Humphrey that I want to see him ... No, any time within the next ten seconds will do.
He hangs up.
Claire I think I'll disappear.
She slips out stage left. Sir Humphrey knocks and enters.
Jim Ah, Humphrey. About this loan . . .
Humphrey Prime Minister?
Jim It is all good news, isn't it?
Humphrey Tremendous news.
Jim There's no hidden snags? You know. Terms and conditions, penalty clauses, rough guarantees?
Humphrey Oh no. Nothing like thar. Standard agreement.
Jim An ordinary Treasury loan? As far as we're concerned?
Humphrey (hesitates) In a sense. Yes.
Jim In a sense?
Humphrey In due course. Following agreed procedures. After certain formalities.
Jim But the money goes straight to the Treasury?
Humphrey It goes to the Treasury, yes, of course.
Jim Straight to the Treasury?
Humphrey Broadly speaking, yes. More or less.
Jim Broadly speaking? How would you describe it if you were . . . narrowly speaking?
Humphrey is silent
Does it have to go through the European Central Bank?
Humphrey We get money, that's what matters.
Jim Let me put this another way. Will the loan be in euros?
Humphrey Prime Minisrer, I urge you not to clutter your mind with procedural detail and monetary trivia.
Jim Humphrey. In words of one syllable, is this plan dependent on our abandoning sterling and joining the euro?
Humphrey (chuckles) 'Dependent' has three syllables and 'abandoning' has four. (Checks his watch.) Seriously, Prime Minister, it's almost time for your dinner with the Foreign Minister of Kumranisran, you really mustn't be late.
Jim Answer my question.
Humphrey All right, Prime Minister, you've asked a straight question and I'll give you a straight answer, which, however, clearly has to be considered in its proper context: in the course of all financial negotiations, certain provisos have to be preconditioned, various caveats have to be postulated, designated, investigated and specified and a number of considerations have to be determined, acknowledged and indeed sometimes conceded so that we are able to facilitate the finalisation of preliminary plans to create an epistemological basis for all parties to proceed towards a mutually beneficial consummation which will acknowledge and safeguard the viral interests of all the participanrs without jeopardising in any material way the underlying collective benefit ultimately accruing to the signatories or leaving unresolved such anomalies and irregularities thar might precipitate operational uncertainties down the line, so that there will be a presumed modicum of ironclad reciprocity which in the great scheme of things will be to everybody's advantage.
Jim Did that mean yes or no?
Humphrey Don't you think yes and no are rather broad and unspecific in their application?
Jim No. Is joining the euro a condition of getting the loan?
Humphrey In the sense that . . . if agreement is .. . at the end of the day ...
Jim Humphrey!
Humphrey Yes, it is.
Jim You were going to hide this from me until it was roo late!
Humphrey No, but, yes, I mean, they all insisted ... the ECB insisted . .. Prime Minister, it is the only way! You need this deal. I did it for you.
Jim For me?
Humphrey Prime Minister, I'm trying to save you from yourself.
Jim Humphrey, do you know what comes with joining the euro?
Humphrey The loan, European unity ...
Jim An austerity package. Disastrous interest rates, public expenditure cuts, more interference from Brussels in every damn thing. No ECB. No euro. Or no deal!
Humphrey All the delegates have so many objections.
Jim Ten trillion dollars' worth of objections?
Humphrey is silent.
Jim As I thought. It would be the ultimate victory for Brussels. Britain becomes a mere outpost of the European empire.
Humphrey Of which you're a President.
Jim Don't be silly, Humphrey, I just chair meetings for six months.
Humphrey If you would just take another look at the computer models ...
Jim No. Computer models got Britain into this whole financial mess.
Humphrey That's different. Nobody knew that those computer models in the City were being given faulty information. Everyone assumed the mortgages were worth their face value.
Jim But they were worth nothing! Why didn't anyone know? Why didn't you know?
Humphrey (sighs, humiliated) Everyone thought that everyone else understood what was going on and nobody wanred to admit they couldn't make sense of it.
Jim Why couldn't they?
Humphrey Because it didn't make sense! Everybody thought that all the others knew, and there were some who knew, but the ones who didn't know didn't believe that the ones who did know knew.
Jim Say that again?
Humphrey Nobody wanted to rock the boat because everrone was making so much money!
Jim Computer models, Humphrey, are no different from fashion models: seductive, unreliable, easily corrupted, and they lead sensible people to make fools of themselves. And because you believed the computer models about the euro you tried to bounce your plan past me, and not tell me until it was too late. I'm appalled. I really don't know if we can go on working together.
Humphrey Prime Minister!
Jim I always thought I cound trust you.
Humphrey (anguished) You can!
Jim Quite frankly, I'm now profoundly suspicious of this whole pipeline plan. I mean, I don't know what else I don't know. Do you know?
Humphrey Do I know what you don't know?
Jim Yes. Is there anything else I don't know that I should know?
Humphrey Well, I ... I hardly know where to begin. 
Jim About this plan, I mean!
Humphrey regains control of himself.
Humphrey Prime Minister, you know everything that you need to know. If you want the loan, if you don't want your premiership to crash on rake-off, this is the way it has to be.
Bernard knocks and enters.
Bernard Drinks with Mr Aitikecv, the Kumranistani Foreign Secretary, are in five minutes, Prime Minister.
Jim Thank you, Bernard. At least I can believe what you tell me.
Jim looks at Humphrey, and exits.
Humphrey Shut the door.
Bernard follows, shutting the door from outside. From inside.
Humphrey Did you tell the Prime M inister about joining the euro?
Humphrey Well, what put him on to it?
Bernard Perhaps it was his Special Adviser.
Humphrey That woman! How did she get here without our knowing?
Bernard I expect he called her on his BlackBerry.
Humphrey Bernard! You're letting him make his own appointments? If you lose control over his diary, you lose control over him! You never know where it'll end. He'll start running the country.
Bernard He can't. He doesn't know how to.
Humphrey Of course he doesn't. So he must be stopped.
Bernard But what can I do about it?
Humphrey Get rid of his BlackBerry, Bernard!
Bernard How?
Humphrey Look. Give me yours.
Bernard hands over bis BlackBerry.
Humphrey Get me a paper clip.
Bernard gets one from Jim's desk.Humphrey straightens it.
Humphrey You slide off.the back plare. Take out the battery. See that hole? It's the reset button. ush it in there. Right. Now it's scrambled for days.
Bernard takes back his BlackBerry and checks it. Humphrey is right.
Bernard Sir Humphrey! I had no idea you understood technology.
Humphrey I understand survival. You can practise while I'm at the dinner.
Humphrey exits.

