Act One
SCENE ONE

Late afternoon on autumn Friday. 
Jim's study, a comfortably furnished panelled room in Chequers, an English country mansion. It bas a desk, a seating area, double doors (stage right), a smaller door (left) and big windows upstage centre.
Sir Humphrey Appleby and Bernard Woolley are waiting. Humphrey is standing, Bernard is sitting.
Newsreader (On TV) And now, weather. Severe thunderstorms are forecast ...
Humphrey switches off the TV. Bernard puts down the Evening Standard.
Bernard It's awful, isn't it?
Humphrey What is awful, Bernard?
Bernard Well, all these jobs going. Interest rates. Repossessions. Fear of inflation. Foreclosures.
Humphrey Oh yes. Terrible.
Bernard You don't sound terribly worried, Sir Humphrey.
Humphrey Bernard, I am not being sacked, repossessed, inflated or foreclosed. Neither are you.
Bernard Nor's the Prime Minister. But he's worried stiff.
Humphrey So he should be.
Bernard You don't sympathise with him?
Humphrey That's the deal. That's how Prime Ministers' careers go. They get to be on the front page every day for years, which they love. They travel the long path from euphoric triumph to ignominious failure and then make way for the next saviour of the nation. It's called democracy.
Bernard It beats me why anyone would want to be Prime Minister.
Humphrey It's the only top job that requires no previous experience, no training, no qualifications and limited intelligence.
Bernard Sir Humphrey ... You do believe in democracy, don't you?
Humphrey Do I, Bernard? Actually no, not as most people understand it. Democracy should nor be about executing the will of the people. It should be the process whereby we secure the consent of the people to the policies of those qualified to decide on their behalf.
Bernard Like who?
Humphrey Like us, Bernard.
Bernard I believe in democracy, Sir Humphrey.
Humphrey It does you credit. And if all the voters were as informed and intelligent as - say - me, or even you, it could possibly work. But that's hardly realistic.
Bernard Well, obviously we have to stop the government making stupid mistakes. If I did everything the Prime Minister told me to do, I'd be fired within a week, and rightly so. But I am there to help him.
Humphrey Bernard, we have a leadership crisis in this country. If the government can't or won't exercise it, it falls ro us, whether we want it or not.
Bernard I know. Power abhors a vacuum.

Humphrey And we are currently led by one. We should exercise power because we have nothing to gain or lose personally: we have respectable salaries, honours, an office and a chauffeur ...
Bernard I haven't got a chauffeur ...
Humphrey You will, Bernard, when you grow up. We end up with an index-linked pension, a bank directorship, a couple of nicely remunerated quangos and a cottage in the Dordogne. So we can be entirely even-handed in our judgements and make them in the public interest.
Bernard Well, things may not seem so bad soon, when we tell the Prime Minister about Kumranistan.
He taps the file on the coffee table. European Central Bank to the rescue.
Humphrey Bernard! Do not mention the ECB co the Prime Minister. You know his views.
Bernard I know he's afraid that Brussels will take away most of his powers.
Humphrey They already have. And so they should. All we need him to do is preside at tonight's dinner, pretend he's read the Kumranistan plan, and leave the rest to us.
Jim Hacker, the Prime Minister; enters right. He is followed by a Driver carrying a pile of five Red Boxes.
Jim Sorry I'am late, it's been a terrible day.
Humphrey Any particular reason?
The Driver leaves.
Jim You've read about the Cabinet split?
Humphrey Yes.
Jim You've seen what's happened to the Footsie and the pound?

Humphrey Yes.
Jim So how many particular reasons do you want?
Humphrey Well ...
Jim And now this Lancaster House conference is turning into a catastrophe.
Humphrey It was your idea to convene it, Prime Minister.
Jim Humphrey, if you become President of Europe in the middle of the biggest financial crisis for a generation -
Bernard Um - with respect, Prime Minister, there is a President of the European Union and it's not you. What the UK Government currently has - not you personally - is the Presidency of the European Council.
Jim He's President of the Union, I'm President of the Council.
Humphrey No, Prime Minister, the President of the European Union itself is the Belgian Prime Minister ...
Jim Who is completely unknown!
Humphrey Well, obviously! He's Belgian.
Jim And not elected. Appointed. In secret! Course, you wouldn't have a problem with that, would you, Humphrey?
Humphrey You do me an injustice. I am all in favour of elections. Provided the right people do the voting. But the difference, as far as you're concerned, is between being head of an empire of five hundred million people and chairing the Council of Ministers for six months.
Jim Humphrey, we were talking about why I convened the conference on this dreadful recession. I had to do something.
Humphrey And the conference was something. So you did it! Well done.
Jim But now it's falling apart, which might just finish me.
Humphrey It may not be falling apart, Prime Minister.
Jim Haven't you been reading the conference reports?
Humphrey I have. Have you?
Jim The spadework wasn't done properly. The Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor let me down badly. Instead of having everything nailed down before they all convened, they left it to chance. Useless! We only just won re-election and they're plotting to get rid of me already!
Bernard 'Forsan miseros meliora sequentur.'
Jim What?
Bernard 'For those in misery, perhaps better things will follow.'
Humphrey Well said, Bernard.
Bernard I didn't actually say that. That was Virgil.
Humphrey I know chat, Bernard.
Bernard At least I did say it, just now, but not originally.
Humphrey Thank you, Bernard. We get the point.
Jim It was completely predictable: the Krauts don't want a stimulus plan, they're terrified of runaway inflation, that's what destroyed the Weimar Republic and brought them Hitler. The Wops and the Dagoes are up to their armpits in debt already. The Frogs only want it if France gets aII the benefits ...
Bernard (interrupts) Prime Minister, I really think you should stop using these pejorative epithets to describe our allies, they might slip our in public sometime.
Jim Quite right, Bernard. Thank you. And the Micks and the Polacks aren't getting the subsidies they were promised, which they regard as a betrayal. So it's time for me to get hands-on and give some leadership.
Humphrey Good.
Jim So - tell me, what should I do?
Humphrey That's just the kind of leadership we need.
Jim Thank you. Humphrey.
Humphrey And we have good news for you, Prime Minister...
Bernard Late last night we had a breakthrough at Lancaster House. A new player appeared on the scene.
Jim The Americans? Are they coming after all?
Humphrey No, their position is immutable. They won't come to the conference because you wouldn't let them chair it.
Jim I can't let them chair a European conference, Humphrey. Look at the map!
Humphrey It could become an international conference, if that would save the whole European financial system from melting down again.
Jim Don't be silly, Humphrey. I'd lose face.
Humphrey Oh yes, of course. Silly me.
Bernard Prime Minister, Kumranistan has joined us.
Jim Has it? Good. (A beat.) Have I heard of them? 
Humphrey They have oil. Massive new reserves have been found. They're offering a possible ten-trillion-dollar loan to Europe. Secured against future purchases.
Jim But - that could solve everything.
Humphrey Yes.
Jim Save the conference!
Bernard Yes.
Jim Save Europe, in fact! (In his own world.) 'TRIUMPH FOR PRIME MINISTER!' 'VICTORY FOR RESIDENT OF EUROPE!'
Humphrey With respect ...
Jim (firmly) Victory for a President of Europe, Humphrey. 
Bernard It might even save your job.
Jim My job's perfectly safe. Other people have survived with small majorities. Wilson had a majority of four in 1964. He lasted six years.
Humphrey I was never awfully good sums but - um, four would be exactly double the size of your majority, am I right?
Jim So?
Humphrey He had to fight a second election pretty soon, to get a working majority.
Bernard And Wilson had hair.
Jim (dangerously) What are you saying, Bernard?
Bernard Nothing. Only that... well, no Prime Minister or US President has been elected without a full head of hair since Eisenhower or Churchill in the 1950s. So I'm, um, saying that you did magnificently to win a majority of two.
Jim (bitterly) Thad hair when I was first elected. I lost my hair in the service of my country.
Humphrey The Kumranisran deal may solve your problems.
Jim Fine. Where do I sign?
Humphrey We're not quite there yet. They want something in exchange.
Bernard You know where Kumranistan is?
Jim Yes. (A beat.) Well, sort of. You know, over there.
Bernard It lies in Turkestan, north of Kazakstan, Uzbekistan, and Afghanistan. (Goes to a globe.) Here, in fact.
Jim As I said. Exactly.
Humphrey They had been planning to take their oil to Europe through the Soviet pipeline.
Jim They're not Soviets any more, Humphrey. They haven't been Soviets for twenty years.
Humphrey They still are in spirit, and always will be.
Bernard The, um, Russians want a pretty huge payment - 
Humphrey Which Kumranistan doesn't want to pay, since the Soviets will have their hands on the pipeline tap.
Bernard So, with a little prompting from us: Plan B! A pipeline through Turkey, Greece and southern Europe, avoiding Russia altogether.
Humphrey What they need is European agreement. And that's what they're prepared to lend us ten trillion dollars for.
Jim Why?
Humphrey They want the guarantee of future oil purchases by everyone in the EU.
Jim (a beat) I don't get it.
Humphrey It's awfully simple, Prime Minister. Kumranistan will lend Europe the money to buy Kumranistan's oil.
Jim And Europe borrows another ten trillion? More debt?
Humphrey It's not a problem, it doesn't have to be repaid for years. We get the money now, interest free, and we repay it in the future when we buy the oil that we'll need anyway.
Jim So where do they make their money?
Humphrey We'll pay a premium on the oil. But that's not for many years.
Jim Are all the Europeans on board?
Humphrey They are. And the problems are what we' ve been negotiating, as you will have seen in your Red Boxes.
Jim Yes. Um - remind me.
Humphrey Well, as you'll doubtless remember, the Turks refused ro cooperate unless they were admitted to the European Community. I see their point. I've always had
a soft spot for Johnny Turk.
Jim Johnny Turk? (Sniggers.) You're on first-name terms, then?
Humphrey (laughs mirthlessly) Very droll, Prime Minister. Turkey is an important ally, the only Muslim country with a secular democracy. We need -
Jim (interrupting) - Johnny Turk, yes.
Bernard Germany, France and Italy were against the plan on principle.
Jim What changed their minds?
Humphrey A ten-trillion-dollar loan.
Bernard That surprised me, Sir Humphrey. Surely, if a principle was involved ...?
Humphrey I think you'll find ten trillion dollars is a bit above the going rate for principles in the EU, Bernard.
Jim What was the principle?
Humphrey They don't like Muslims.
Jim Oh. Ah.
Bernard Anyway, everything is agreed. Everyone gets a share in the construction. 
Bernard unfurls a big wall map. It shows an absurd zig-zag pipeline route through Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece, Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, Montenegro, Bosnia, Hungary; Slovakia, Czech Republic, Austria, Croatia, Italy, Spain, France, Germany and all points north.
Bernard Here's the route. That helped, of course,
Jim We're saved! But why didn't I know about all this?
Humphrey It's top secret.
Jim Good God, Humphrey, I'm the Prime Minister!
Humphrey (soothing) I know, Prime Minister, and what an excellent Prime Minister you are! But it had to be kept under wraps. If it had leaked this week, money markets would have gone mad...
Jim I' see. Well... is that everything I need to know?
Bernard There's one other thing.
Humphrey (warning) Bernard ...
Jim gives Humphrey an inquiring look.
Bernard A power group in Kumranistan still wants the Russian route.
Humphrey Ah. (Relaxes.) Yes, Bernard's right, they don't want to upset the Soviets. It's understandable, they share a border. But the Kumranistani Foreign Secretary has come over here to put the deal to us if we want it.
Jim Invite him to dinner! Tonight!
Bernard I did, Prime Minister.
Humphrey (slowly, patiently) That's why we're here.
Jim And he can do the deal? Now?
Humphrey He has the authority. But he needs careful handling, they're very sensitive about respect.
Jim I know, those Middle-Eastern types... (Chuckles) So insecure, always so worried about losing face. (Catches himself) Though sometimes, of course, that's perfectly reasonable. But you get an awful lot of respect for ten trillion dollars. He can have all of mine, for a start.
Humphrey Excellent, Prime Minister.
He exits. Bernard is following.
Jim Bernard.
Bernard Yes, Prime Minister?
Jim There's something you're not happy about. What is it?
Bernard Oh. Um ... um ... I'm not sure I can - 
Jim Spit it out, Bernard.
Bernard Um-'Timeo Danos et dona ferentes...'
Jim looks blank.
Bernard 'I fear the Greeks, especially when they bring gifts.' ... Remember the Trojan Horse, Prime Minister.
He exits. Jim thinks a moment; gets out his BlackBerry and dials.
Jim Clarie? you at Chequers yet?... Come to my study please... Now!
He rings off, hurries to the pile of Red Boxes, removes the top four and opens the lowest box. He digs out a file from near the bottom. Opens it and starts to read. There is a knock at the other door.
Come in.
Claire enters. She is in her late thirties, attractive and intelligent.
Jim Ah. Claire. There's something I don't know about this pipeline plan. What is it that Humphrey isn't telling me? Bernard was blathering about Trojan Horses.
Claire That's interesting. Must be the pipeline mechanics.
Jim I don't care about the mechanics, I'm not an engineer.
Claire Fiscal mechanics, Jim. Financial engineering. Perhaps Humphrey has arranged for the proposed loan to go through the European Central Bank, and isn't mentioning it.
Jim Is that important?
Claire Yes. What if it's set up so that if we want any of the loan we'll have ro join the euro?
Jim We can't join the euro! It would be a catastrophe! Hand over control of interest rates? Control of exchange rates? Control of money supply? When I need to inflate to get re-elected, the ECB might deflate because of German price rises and I could get kicked out!
Claire Candidly, I'm not sure if that would bother Sir Humphrey.
Jim And then there's Greece! And Portugal! They could drag down our recovery!
Claire What recovery?
Jim (picks up phone) Bernard, tell Sir Humphrey that I want to see him ... No, any time within the next ten seconds will do.
He hangs up.
Claire I think I'll disappear.
She slips out stage left. Sir Humphrey knocks and enters.
Jim Ah, Humphrey. About this loan ...
Humphrey Prime Minister?
Jim It is all good news, isn't it?
Humphrey Tremendous news.
Jim There's no hidden snags? You know. Terms and conditions, penalty clauses, rough guarantees?
Humphrey Oh no. Nothing like that. Standard agreement.
Jim An ordinary Treasury loan? As far as we're concerned?
Humphrey (hesitates) In a sense. Yes.
Jim In a sense?
Humphrey In due course. Following agreed procedures. After certain formalities.
Jim But the money goes straight to the Treasury?
Humphrey It goes to the Treasury, yes, of course.
Jim Straight to the Treasury?
Humphrey Broadly speaking, yes. More or less.
Jim Broadly speaking? How would you describe it if you were ... narrowly speaking?
Humphrey is silent
Does it have to go through the European Central Bank?
Humphrey We get money, that's what matters.
Jim Let me put this another way. Will the loan be in euros?
Humphrey Prime Minister, I urge you not to clutter your mind with procedural detail and monetary trivia.
Jim Humphrey. In words of one syllable, is this plan dependent on our abandoning sterling and joining the euro?
Humphrey (chuckles) 'Dependent' has three syllables and 'abandoning' has four. (Checks his watch.) Seriously, Prime Minister, it's almost time for your dinner with the Foreign Minister of Kumranistan, you really mustn't be late.
Jim Answer my question.
Humphrey All right, Prime Minister, you've asked a straight question and I'll give you a straight answer, which, however, clearly has to be considered in its proper context: in the course of all financial negotiations, certain provisos have to be preconditioned, various caveats have to be postulated, designated, investigated and specified and a number of considerations have to be determined, acknowledged and indeed sometimes conceded so that we are able to facilitate the finalisation of preliminary plans to create an epistemological basis for all parties to proceed towards a mutually beneficial consummation which will acknowledge and safeguard the viral interests of all the participants without jeopardising in any material way the underlying collective benefit ultimately accruing to the signatories or leaving unresolved such anomalies and irregularities that might precipitate operational uncertainties down the line, so that there will be a presumed modicum of ironclad reciprocity which in the great scheme of things will be to everybody's advantage.
Jim Did that mean yes or no?
Humphrey Don't you think yes and no are rather broad and unspecific in their application?
Jim No. Is joining the euro a condition of getting the loan?
Humphrey In the sense that ... if agreement is .. . at the end of the day ...
Jim Humphrey!
Humphrey Yes, it is.
Jim You were going to hide this from me until it was too late!
Humphrey No, but, yes, I mean, they all insisted ... the ECB insisted ... Prime Minister, it is the only way! You need this deal. I did it for you.
Jim For me?
Humphrey Prime Minister, I'm trying to save you from yourself.
Jim Humphrey, do you know what comes with joining the euro?
Humphrey The loan, European unity ...
Jim An austerity package. Disastrous interest rates, public expenditure cuts, more interference from Brussels in every damn thing. No ECB. No euro. Or no deal!
Humphrey All the delegates have so many objections.
Jim Ten trillion dollars' worth of objections?
Humphrey is silent.
Jim As I thought. It would be the ultimate victory for Brussels. Britain becomes a mere outpost of the European empire.
Humphrey Of which you're a President.
Jim Don't be silly, Humphrey, I just chair meetings for six months.
Humphrey If you would just take another look at the computer models ...
Jim No. Computer models got Britain into this whole financial mess.
Humphrey That's different. Nobody knew that those computer models in the City were being given faulty information. Everyone assumed the mortgages were worth their face value.
Jim But they were worth nothing! Why didn't anyone know? Why didn't you know?
Humphrey (sighs, humiliated) Everyone thought that everyone else understood what was going on and nobody wanted to admit they couldn't make sense of it.
Jim Why couldn't they?
Humphrey Because it didn't make sense! Everybody thought that all the others knew, and there were some who knew, but the ones who didn't know didn't believe that the ones who did know knew.
Jim Say that again?
Humphrey Nobody wanted to rock the boat because everyone was making so much money!
Jim Computer models, Humphrey, are no different from fashion models: seductive, unreliable, easily corrupted, and they lead sensible people to make fools of themselves. And because you believed the computer models about the euro you tried to bounce your plan past me, and not tell me until it was too late. I'm appalled. I really don't know if we can go on working together.
Humphrey Prime Minister!
Jim I always thought I could trust you.
Humphrey (anguished) You can!
Jim Quite frankly, I'm now profoundly suspicious of this whole pipeline plan. I mean, I don't know what else I don't know. Do you know?
Humphrey Do I know what you don't know?
Jim Yes. Is there anything else I don't know that I should know?
Humphrey Well, I ... I hardly know where to begin. 
Jim About this plan, I mean!
Humphrey regains control of himself.
Humphrey Prime Minister, you know everything that you need to know. If you want the loan, if you don't want your premiership to crash on rake-off, this is the way it has to be.
Bernard knocks and enters.
Bernard Drinks with Mr Aitikecv, the Kumranistani Foreign Secretary, are in five minutes, Prime Minister.
Jim Thank you, Bernard. At least I can believe what you tell me.
Jim looks at Humphrey, and exits.
Humphrey Shut the door.
Bernard follows, shutting the door from outside. From inside.
Humphrey Did you tell the Prime Minister about joining the euro?
Humphrey Well, what put him on to it?
Bernard Perhaps it was his Special Adviser.
Humphrey That woman! How did she get here without our knowing?
Bernard I expect he called her on his BlackBerry.
Humphrey Bernard! You're letting him make his own appointments? If you lose control over his diary, you lose control over him! You never know where it'll end. He'll start running the country.
Bernard He can't. He doesn't know how to.
Humphrey Of course he doesn't. So he must be stopped.
Bernard But what can I do about it?
Humphrey Get rid of his BlackBerry, Bernard!
Bernard How?
Humphrey Look. Give me yours.
Bernard hands over bis BlackBerry.
Humphrey Get me a paper clip.
Bernard gets one from Jim's desk.Humphrey straightens it.
Humphrey You slide off.the back plate. Take out the battery. See that hole? It's the reset button. Push it in there. Right. Now it's scrambled for days.
Bernard takes back his BlackBerry and checks it. Humphrey is right.
Bernard Sir Humphrey! I had no idea you understood technology.
Humphrey I understand survival. You can practise while I'm at the dinner.
Humphrey exits.

SCENE TWO
Jim and Claire are enjoying drinks after dinner: It is now dark outside.
Jim Dinner went well, I thought. They liked my speech.
Claire And they really liked the goulash and dumplings.
Jim (gives her a look) What did you make of the Kumranistani Foreign Minister? You think he's really going to come up with this loan?
Claire With the Kumranistanis, it's all about personal relationships. Trust. Confidence. Respect. Plus, he really liked the goulash so that's a good start - so much better than the usual rubber chicken.
Jim Then all we'll need is a few endorsements.
Claire Endorsements?
Jim Yes. Do you remember the World Economic Forum at Davos? That really worked because Bob Geldof came out in support of it.
Claire Yes, we're working on that. And Annie Lennox, and Bono.
Jim Bono. Great!
Bernard enters.
Hello, Bernard. Enjoy dinner?
Bernard I wasn't there, I was busy with - other things.
Jim Pity, you'd have enjoyed my speech.
Bernard I'm sure, Prime Minister, but I beard the goulash was good.
Jim (gives him a look) New cook.
Bernard Yes, and in connection with that, we have a situation. We've just discovered the cook here is in the UK illegally.
Claire (instantly alert) We have an illegal immigrant working at Chequers?
Jim How? What the hell is the Home Office doing?
Bernard I wonder if anyone will ever solve that perennial riddle. 
Jim Plotting against me, I should imagine. The Home Secretary wants my job too.
Claire They all do.
Jim I'll reshuffle her to the graveyard: the Minister of Culture, Media and Sports. There's no coming back from there.
Bernard I've never understood the connection between those three.
Jim Culture, Media and Sports? None of them matter.
Claire But if you suck up to them you get lots of good publicity.
Bernard What do I do about this cook?
Jim Where's she from?
Bernard She wouldn't say, apparently, but she's got a false EU passport.
Jim Can't we just rush a visa through for her?
Bernard I'll try, but if you're right about the Home Office it'll take months. I think we have to let her go.
Jim Right. We can't risk the media finding out. 'PRIME MINISTER HARBOURS ILLEGAL IMMIGRANT!' How did it come to light?
Bernard One of the waiters mentioned it at dinner.
Jim Somebody's probably phoned the BBC already.
They all laugh. The phone rings. Bernard answers it and listens.
Bernard Hello ... It's the BBC ... Oh, I see. Fine ... Ahl (He hangs up.)That was actually the Press Office. BBC Television's devoting their Sunday morning programme to you, Prime Minister.
Jim Devoting it to me?
Bernard No other stories. A full hour about you.
Jim Should I be pleased?
Bernard I fear not. It will be called Government in Crisis.
Jim Christ!
Bernard They want to interview you about the rumoured Cabinet reshuffle and the deadlock in the Lancaster House Conference.
Claire You're not going tO do that, Jim. (To Bernard.) He's not doing that.
Jim If I could mention the Kumranistan loan ... 
Claire You can't! Not until Kumranistan has definitely signed on the dotted line and not until this euro business with the European Central bank is sorted out.
Jim Phone them back. Pretend to be helpful.
Claire Whatever they ask, just give them one of the replies in the red binder by the phone.
Bernard crosses to the phone and peruses the red binder with interest.
Bernard I haven't seen this before.
Jim Supplied by the Press Office.
Claire At my suggestion. I worked on it with them.
Bernard Good. (Dials.) Yes ... May I speak to Robin Simpson? (Listens.) Yes, it's Bernard Wolley here, the Prime Minister's Principal Private Secretary... He can't speak to you himself, but how can I help?
He presses the speakerphone button, so that Jim and Claire can hear.
Robin (voice-over) Well, it seems that he is losing the support of his Cabinet and backbenchers.
Claire Number three.
Bernard turns a page and reads a reply from the red binder.
Bernard 'The Prime Minister is not interested in Westminster tittle-tartle. He has the full support of his colleagues and his party on all matters of substance. It's business as usual.'
Robin (voice-over) I see. But bas the Prime Minister thought of resigning in the interests of party unity?
Claire Number four.
Bernard (as be turns the page) You're serious asking me that?
Claire lip-mimes along with him.
Bernard 'The Prime Minister was elected to do a job and he intends to get on with it. It will mean rough decisions but that's what the country expects and that's what he's going to do.' Next?
Robin (voice-over) What about the awful state of the economy?
Jim and Claire Number one.
Jim now lip-mimes along with Claire.
Bernard 'This isn't a British crisis, it's a world crisis. Many countries are worse affected than we are. We intend to play our part within the community.'
Robin (voice-over) But what exactly is he doing about it?
Jim Two?
Claire nods.
(To Bernard.) Two.
Bernard 'The government will do everything that needs to be done. He will not flinch from his duty and a statement will be made when the rime is ripe.'
Robin (voice-over) Why do you think the European Financial Conference has got nowhere?
Bernard I don't think that.
Jim and Claire Five.
Bernard What?
Jim and Claire FIVE!
Robin (voice-over) Is the Prime Minister there?
Bernard No, sorry, that's the TV you can hear.
He mouths 'Shut up!' as be switches off the speakerpbone.
Bernard Um ... (Flipping page to read number five.) 'The meeting stroke conference has certainly not been a failure. There has been invaluable groundwork and a blueprint is being drawn up for the next phase. Rome wasn't built in a day.' (Listens.) Thank you.
Jim What's she thanking you for?
Bernard (hand over mouthpiece) She says I've been thoroughly unhelpful.
Jim Well done, Bernard.
Bernard (into phone) What? ... How happy is the Prime Minister about his future?
Jim I'm as happy as a ratcatcher on a rubbish dump.
Bernard The Prime Minister is as happy as an Environmental Health Officer on a Civic Amenity Site.
He hangs up.
Jim I hate the BBC. Always waxing indignant. Nasty, rude, arrogant, aggressive, ungraceful people who all think they could do better than me. They have their own political line. It's like having three Oppositions: one at Westminster and two others at Broadcasting House and the TV Centre.
The phone rings. Bernard gets it.
Bernard Yes? ... Oh, Ms Simpson again ... What kind of leak? ... About joining the euro?
Jim and Claire are all ears.
Bernard No, the Prime Minister knows nothing about this, Britain's position on the euro is unchanged ... No, I can't explain the markers, who can?
He rings off.
Jim Let's get online.
He picks up his BlackBerry from bis desk, where he left it before dinner.
Jim My BlackBerry doesn't seem to be working.
Bernard (pretending surprise) Good heavens! Mine isn't either.
Claire Mine is. Oh. This is interesting. The rumours starred after heavy buying of euros by Golding Brothers Bank. Funny.
Jim Why?
Claire Humphrey's got a directorship lined up there when he retires.
They all look at each other.
Jim He's out of control.
Bernard It might have been someone else.
Jim Who else knew? Even I didn't know.
They all think.
Bernard When last seen, he was drowning his sorrows in a glass of the Glenlivet in the Long Gallery.
Jim (still thinking) As there's been heavy buying of the euro .. . that would explain today's heavy selling of the pound. I must do something. (He does nothing.)
Bernard You know, I'm sure Humphrey wouldn't leak.
Jim Are you?
Bernard No.
Jim He tried to bounce us into the euro and feather his nest by briefing the bank. I've got to get him under control. He's an over-mighty subject.
Bernard Actually, he's the Queen's subject, not yours, you're just the -
Jim I know who I am, Bernard! Claire, it's just one more example of the corruption of those who think they're above the law. We've started to curb the MPs, now we must deal with the Civil Service.
Claire Suits me. We've had that paper ready for a while.
Bernard What paper?
Claire Reform of the Civil Service, root and branch.
Bernard Oh! That paper.
Jim So we have. Where is it, Bernard?
Bernard (immediately) It's gone.
Jim What do you mean, 'gone'?
Bernard Lost. Discredited. Shredded. One of those. Can't remember exactly.
Jim Bernard...
Bernard It really wasn't very good. Too general. Badly argued. Impracticable. Over-specific ...
Jim Too general and over-specific?
Claire There's a copy in your desk, Jim.
She gets it. Jim leafs through it.
Jim Oh yes. (Chuckles.) Than will really cramp their style. Clip their wings. (Chuckles.) Tie their hands.
Bernard Nothing has hands and wings, Prime Minister.
Jim Sorry, Bernard, but the party will love this. So will the MPs. It'll deflect attention from all their little fiddles and diddles. Get Humphrey in, Bernard.
Bernard exits, gloomily.
The country will love it too. It's a winner.
Claire Jim, just remember the old rule: never corner the rat, it may bite. Give him an escape route.
Jim nods. Bernard re-enters.
Bernard He's coming.
Humphrey enters.
Jim Ah, Humphrey, sit down. We've been talking about this leak.
Humphrey Who leak, Prime Minister?
Jim About joining the euro. Surely you've heard? It's all round the City, apparently.
Humphrey Oh. That. Yes, well...
Jim What can you tell me about it?
Humphrey I, Prime Minister? Nothing, except I'm told there are these rumours. Happens all the time.
Jim This is different. Hardly anybody knew your plan. Then Golding Brothers Bank started buying wads of euros this afternoon. Who tipped them off?
Humphrey If anyone did, we'll never find out.
Jim Oh, I think we will. Um - where did you have lunch yesterday, Humphrey?
Humphrey I can't remember.
Bernard It was Le Gavroche, Sir Humphrey.
Humphrey Oh yes, Le Gavroche. Why?
Jim On your own?
Humphrey I, er, I don't recall... Now who was it?
Jim You don't remember that either?
Humphrey One has so many lunches.
Jim (helpfully) One a day, in fact.
Humphrey Yes.
Jim I understand. Bernard, ring Le Gavroche and ask the Head Waiter who Sir Humphrey had lunch with yesterday.
Bernard gets up, heads for the phone.
Humphrey Oh yes, I remember now. Some friends.
Jim Who were they?
Humphrey Just friends.
Jim Not directors of Goldings Brothers Bank?
Humphrey Prime Minister, one does not cross-examine one's friends about what directorships they may happen to hold.
Jim Well, we can easily find out. Anyway, that's not the point.
Humphrey No, of course it's not... What is the point, exactly?
Jim The point is, there is bound to be suspicion in cases like this.
Humphrey I can't see why. Surely you know, Prime Minister, that the Civil Service will always do what is best for the country.
Jim What about the government?
Humphrey I presume the government will too.
Jim Right. And this air of suspicion isn't fair on loyal public servants.
Humphrey It certainly isn't.
Jim So I've decided to introduce a new Civil Service Act.
Humphrey What?!
Jim Yes, I think you'll be very happy about this. It will include a ban on any related jobs for civil servants for five years after they retire. No revolving door any more. Gone for good.
Humphrey But...Prime!Minisrer...
Jim No paid directorships, or quangos, no paid consultancies ...
Humphrey But that's absurd! Men of great wisdom, great experience, leading figures of their generation, so much to offer ...
Jim And they can offer it, Humphrey. Pro Bono. Latin, Bernard.
Bernard Pro bono publico, actually.
Jim Exactly. All that wisdom and experience can be offered to the unpaid voluntary sector, Humphrey, for the public good. It will remove all the temptation to betray government confidences to commercial employers. That'll be a relief, won't it?
Humphrey But there's never been a problem. We have a clearance committee. Everybody's new job has to be approved by it.
Jim Who appoints the members?
Humphrey Um ...
Bernard There's an established procedure...
Claire You appoint them, Sir Humphrey...
Humphrey Do I? Oh yes, so I do. As it happens.
Jim So that will be another burden off your shoulders. We'll appoint an independent Clearance Czar.
Humphrey Not another czar, please, Prime Minister. In the last three years we've appointed an Enterprise Czar, a Youth-Crime Czar, a Welfare Supremo, a Pre-School Supremo, an Unemployment Watchdog, a Banking Regulator, a Science and Technology Supremo and a Community Policing Czar. If you go on like this you won't need a Cabinet.
Jim Perfect!
Humphrey Perfect? Prime Minister, we even have a Twitter Czar!
Bernard His appointment was announced as a Tweet.
Humphrey What's he supposed to achieve?
Jim The same as the others: at least twelve column inches in every paper. Merely by announcing them, it was achieved - it showed we were responsive, we were doing something, and it shut the press up. And - it didn't cost anything.
Humphrey The Twitter Czar earns a hundred and sixty thousand a year!
Jim Cheap at the price. Headline news everywhere.
Bernard It would have cost much more if we'd set them up with offices and staff.
Claire But that would have meant more index-linked pensions, which is something else that the Civil Service Act will address.
Bernard Prime Minister, may I urge you, 'Medio tutissimus ibis. Moderation in all things. Ovid, of course.
Jim I'm being moderate.
Humphrey Get rid of index-linked pensions? You wouldn't want to do that to the nurses, would you? Or the dedicated teachers, the courageous policemen, the gallant firemen ... ?
Claire The starving Permanent Secretaries?
Humphrey (laughs mirthlessly) Very droll, dear lady. Prime Minister ... I agree that there are aspects of the organisation and administration of the public sector which could certainly benefit from measured consideration in the context of changing circumstances and the structural metamorphosis precipitated by the communications revolution, but it is important to bear in mind that, exceptis excipiendis, administrative practical conditions of service have evolved over many years with manifold and complex interrelationships, and any attempt to vary one of them could have serious and unforeseeable effects on others, so to that end I would propose setting up a series of interdepartmental committees ...
Jim No, Humphrey! NO time for interdepartmental committees. But there is one other change that I'd welcome your views on.
Humphrey Prime Minister?
Jim Would you call yourself a generalist? With your degree in classics?
Humphrey Indeed I would, Prime Minister. First class degree, actually.
Bernard Me too.
Jim You see, I was over at the Ministry of Defense yesterday. I find them rather impressive, don't you?
Humphrey (wary) I do, Prime Minister.
Jim What was really impressive was that they knew what they were talking about. They were qualified professionals. Soldiers, generals, admirals, experienced commanders ... All our other government departments are staffed by historians and literature graduates - and classicists.
Humphrey Excellent. Men with the wisdom of the ages.
Jim No, Humphrey. Amateurs.
Humphrey Amateurs?!
Jim We should have teachers at the Department of Education, doctors and nurses at the Department of Health, accountants and actuaries at the Treasury. Experts. People who actually know what needs to be done.
Humphrey I think that would be very dangerous, Prime Minister.
Jim We would still need generalist to take a broader view -
Humphrey Indeed.
Jim - and we have them: we politicians are the generalists. We need experts to advise us, not more amateurs like me.
Humphrey With respect, civil servants are not very much like you and we do know how to run things.
Jim I want advice from real people, who live in the real world doing the real jobs -
Humphrey Prime Minister, you're striking at the very heart of our whole system of government. Our success is founded upon staying free from the taint of professionalism. And the corruption of specialist knowledge. You're not seriously - you can't be serious - it's out of the question... You wouldn't really do this? Would he, Bernard?
Bernard shrugs helplessly.
Jim I would. If we're not getting the Kumranistan loan we won't be needing parliamentary time this session to pass a special Finance Act, so we could pass the Civil Service Act instead.
Humphrey Ah. You mean, if the European Central Bank agreed that the loan could go direct to the individual countries..?
Jim In their chosen currency ... Yes, the Civil Service Act would go on the back burner. Bur you said they wouldn't agree.
Humphrey I didn't think they'd agree... But I could be wrong.
Jim (smiling beatifically) Say that again?
Humphrey (tight-lipped) I said, 'I could be wrong.' (Stands.) Leave it with me, Prime Minister. Bernard!
Humphrey stalks out, with Bernard trailing unhappily behind him.
Claire Well played, Jim. Bernard's in trouble, though, for not heading this off.
Jim Do you think Humphrey can square the Central Bank?
Claire Yes. The Europeans don't give a toss how the money arrives as long as there's a lot of it and they get it quickly.
Jim So all that business about joining the euro ... ?
Claire I think it was just a try-on.
Jim Why is he so keen on Europe?
Claire The whole Civil Service is. It moves power away from the politicians and voters and over to appointed commissioners and unelected officials. Like him.
Jim Is that why he leaked this to his banking chums?
Claire No, I doubt if he meant to. I expect he was just sucking up to chem, showing how useful he could be. He was probably horrified when they started buying euros.
Jim He's going co have some explaining to do when they realise we're not joining.
Claire He'll find a way.
A knock on the door: Humphrey enters.
Humphrey I've had a quick word with the head of the ECB, Prime Minister. He's talking to everyone.
Jim Good. So, if they al l agree, we may actually have this loan in place. Nothing else can go wrong tonight, can it?
Humphrey I don't see how, Prime Minister.
Bernard hurries in, looking worried.
Bernard Prime Minister -
Jim Cheer up, Bernard, have a drinkie, it looks as though your index-linked pension may be safe after all.
Bernard No, Prime Minister - I'm - um - I'm afraid we have a... a situation.
Jim Can't it wait till the morning?
Bernard No, it can't. We have a problem. With the Kumanranistan Foreign Secretary.
Claire Mr Aitikeev?
Jim Nice chap.
Bernard Yes - well...
Bernard shuts the door.
Bernard He just buttoneholed me in the hall. It seems that Mr Aitikeev wants us to provide a... um, sexual partner for him tonight.
Jim What a prat.
Claire That's really not our problem, Bernard. Or yours.
Jim I always said he was a prat, didn't I?
Humphrey Boundaries have to be drawn, Bernard.
Bernard I know. Sir Humphrey - Prime Minister - with respect, it is our problem. I ... I confess I didn't handle it as diplomatically as I should have. I'm afraid he felt slighted. He indicated that unless we find him what he wants he won't sign the contract tomorrow.
Claire What?
Jim My God!
Humphrey How did this happen?
Jim Why didn't you say you'd try to find him someone?
Bernard I should have but, frankly, I was a little shocked.
Humphrey (judicious agreement) Yes.
Clair So go back to Mr Aitikeev and tell him you're working on it.
Bernard How, exactly?
Humphrey Yes, how, exactly? This is Chequers, not Soho.
Claire Surely Bernard can get a girl up from London?
Bernard (aghast) Me?
Jim Are you serious? What about all the security at the gate?
Claire Don't use the gate. It only takes twenty minutes from the West End to Chequers by helicopter. They check it before departure, but nobody checks it on arrival.
Jim Don't they? Why not? And where do you suggest we get a chopper at this time of night?
Bernard We do have an RAF helicopter standing by this weekend. The one the Queen uses.
Jim Do I understand this correctly? You want us to bring a call girl here, in the royal helicopter? For the Kumranistan Foreign Minister? Would you say that's an appropriate use of taxpayers' money?
Humphrey, Bernard and Claire consider.
Claire Well, we do want the deal signed tomorrow, don't we?
Humphrey and Bernard nod.
Got any better ideas?
Humphrey I think we should talk co Mr Aitikeev about this.
Jim Who should?
Humphrey You should.
Jim I'm not doing it.
Humphrey The Foreign Secretary's his opposite number, but you refused to invite him this weekend. Clearly you should have. Claire can't do it, she's a woman. You outrank him, so it has to be you.
Jim I can't possibly do it. This conversation is for a subordinate. Like you, Humphrey.
Humphrey stiffens at the insult.
Humphrey Perhaps you're right. So I suggest that, as Mr Aitikeev spoke to Bernard, and as he's the Private Secretary, Bernard should talk to him. I think that would be the diplomatic protocol.
Bernard Um - I can't seem to recall any diplomatic protocol that specifies the Principal Private Secretary does the pimping.
Jim Well - okay, nor you yourself, maybe, one of your people.
Bernard I don't have any people here. And Prime Minister, we absolutely can't let anyone else in on this.
Jim Why not?
Bernard I'm - um, afraid there's more. He has specific - tastes.
Jim You mean, like blonde or brunette?
Bernard Not exactly.
Jim What? You mean, a redhead?
Bernard No, sir.
Claire Well what? Big boobs, small boobs, big bum - what?
Humphrey/Jim Is he gay?
Bernard If only it were that simple.
Jim Bernard, what sort of woman does he want?
Bernard Not a woman. A girl. A schoolgirl.
They are truly shocked.
Jim We can't possibly condone that.
Bernard Of course not, Prime Minister. So, what do you suggest I do?
Claire Wait! I just want to be dear on this. What does he mean, exactly? A prostitute dressed as a schoolgirl? Or a sixteen-year-old girl who is still actually at school?
Bernard No. He specified an underage schoolgirl. About twelve years old, preferably. Otherwise the whole deal's off.
Jim How dare you bring such a disgusting proposition to me?!
Bernard I'm sorry, Prime Minister. Should I have just let the deal and the conference collapse?
Humphrey sits, shaking his head sadly.
Jim How did he mention it? Was he embarrassed?
Bernard He said he was making a request in total confidence. I assured him I'm extremely discreet. He said, 'No, I want it to be in total confidence.' ' Fine,' I said. 'No problem.' Then he told me. I thought I must have misheard so I asked him to repeat it. He did. I'm afraid he saw the look on my face. He got angry. Made some threats. Told me to see to it or else.
Jim You should have said it just wasn't possible.
Bernard I did. He. said they got a man on the moon, we can get a girl from King's Cross.
Claire I suppose that's technically true.
Jim But hardly the point, Claire.
Humphrey Claire, can Mr Aitikeev really wipe out months of diplomacy?
Claire It wouldn't take much - a word here, a word there, a hint of lost confidence. This whole thing's very finely balanced.
Jim Aitikeev wanes this deal, right?
Claire Yes, but he lost face with Bernard. Losing face is a big thing, for simple people.
Jim gives Humphrey a look.
Jim Claire, won't Aitikeev lose face if the deal falls apart?
Claire No. You will.
Jim Why not him?
Claire He's still got the Russian route if he wants.
Jim He certainly won't get any more weapons if he screws us over.
Humphrey Maybe Aitikeev doesn't care about the weapons. Maybe it's just the President who wants them.
Claire Internal repression? That's a possibility.
Jim Doesn't Aitikeev have to account to his President if this all goes south?
Claire Theoretically. But Aitikeev's here, the President's over there.
Humphrey There's another possibility. Maybe Aitikeev's bluffing. Maybe it's a test.
Jim A test? Of what?
Humphrey Of our friendship.
Jim We hardly know him.
Humphrey Precisely.
Claire Hmm ... a test of the friendship between our two countries ... .
Jim All I know is, we have to make this deal stick! What happens if it all falls apart now and Kumranistan gets offended?
Claire That wouldn't be good.
Jim It would not! It's a very unstable region. Nuclear proliferation is spreading.
Humphrey Yes. Proliferating, in fact.
Claire Bernard, did the Kumranistan Ambassador return to London after dinner?
Bernard No, he's staying overnight too.
Jim jumps up, energised.
Jim Good idea. Bring him here, right away.
Bernard (hurrying to the door) Yes, Prime Minister.
And he's gone. The door slams behind him. Jim looks at Claire and Humphrey.
Jim Okay. Here's my question: why didn't Ml6 warn us that Aitikeev was a pervert?
Humphrey Perhaps they don't know.
Jim (getting up) That's their job, isn't it? We could have been blackmailing Kumranisran for donkeys' years, instead of having to give them all those weapons systems.
Humphrey Please don't say it that way.We don't approve of blackmail as an instrument of government policy.
Jim Since when?
Humphrey Blackmail is criminal, Prime Minister. We use leverage.
Claire Leverage is legal. It is simply persuasion, reminding people of a few embarrassing things that we might otherwise help them keep secret.
Jim Very nice of us. What's this Ambassador like?
Humphrey Very good chap. We were undergraduates together at Balliol.
Jim He's a friend
Humphrey We are friendly.
Jim pours himself a quadruple Scotch with a very small splash of soda.
Jim I wonder... if the President of Kumranistan knows about Mr Airikeev's ... tastes? Can we find out?
Claire Good point! Shall we get him on the phone?
Jim stares at her.
Jim Wake up the President of Kumranistan in the middle of the night and ask if he knows his Foreign Minister likes shagging schoolgirls? I'm not sure exactly what would be gained from that.
Claire Just a thought.
Humphrey Not a very good one, dear lady.
Claire Okay, okay, got any better ideas?
Jim What I meant was, might the Ambassador give us that kind of information?
Humphrey Who knows
Jim wanders over to the windows, sighs, mops his brow.
Jim Still humid.
Claire Clammy. Hope it rains.
The phone rings. They all look at it.
Claire Hello? ... No, it's Claire Sutton ... It's the BBC again ... I see. Thanks. (She bangs up.) Piling on the agony. A big new story about global warming has just broken, they're adding that to the Sunday programme too. Global warming computer models have been proved wrong -
Humphrey How shocking!
Claire The new models show that it's even worse than previously thought. Much more severe. And happening faster.
Jim Is that supposed tO be my fault too?
Claire Everything is at the moment. They want to know why the government is dragging its feet on CO2 emission controls.
Jim (losing it) Do we have to deal with that tonight? As well as the collapsing conference, the ECB, the BBC, my treacherous Cabinet, my disloyal Party, your leaks, the illegal immigrant, the run on the pound, the Kumranistani paedophiliac... ? Is there anything else, anything else we can pile on me tonight? Oh yes! Global bloody warming, thank you very much!
Claire It's just that they're going to add it to the catalogue of your failures.
He gives her a look.
Claire Alleged failures, I mean.
Humphrey Meanwhile, may I suggest that you don't worry too much about global warming?
Jim Right. I can't do anything about that tonight.
Humphrey Tell me, how do they know we're all going to drown in fifty years when the weather forecast was so wrong last Friday?
Jim Because all the scientists agree -
Humphrey So they say. So do the computer models. I know. But why should global-warming computer models be any more accurate than financial ones?
Jim Um...
Humphrey Wall Street computer models were designed to prove sub-prime mortgage derivatives were low risk. These computer models are designed to show global warming is getting worse.
Jim Come off it, Humphrey.
Humphrey Remember mad cow disease? Computer models for that proved that we'd be dying in our hundreds of thousands by now. The only thing is, virtually nobody died, did they? Same with the salmonella-in-eggs computer models. Same with swine flu.
Jim You're suggesting ... what, exactly?
Humphrey Global-warming models leave out nearly all the other possible causes except CO2. And then they say 'Look, CO2 has caused all this climate change.'
Jim What other causes are there?
Humphrey If the earth were actually getting warmer, one might start by looking at the sun. Solar activity, water vapour, cosmic rays, sun spots, underwater volcanoes -
Jim If? The world is getting hotter, the science is .. overwhelming everyone knows that.
Humphrey There's been no rise in temperature since 1998.
Jim Really? But it was rising, wasn't it?
Humphrey From 1975 to 1998, yes, absolutely.
Jim That's what I mean.
Humphrey But it fell from 1940 to 1975. Even though that was a heavily industrialised period, when CO2 shot up. And overall the temperature isn't rising at all: the hottest year in the twentieth century was 1934.
Jim I read that two thousand five hundred top climate scientists contributed to the last IPCC survey and they all agreed that man-made global warming is a proven fact and trapped greenhouse gases are the cause.
Humphrey Nearly fifty of them agreed. The others didn't, actually. Bur their views were left out of the summaries given to the press.
Claire Haven't you seen that film of the melting icebergs in the Antarctic? 
Humphrey Yes. Beautiful, aren't they?
Claire That's caused by CO2.
Humphrey No, that's caused by warm water masses from the Pacific.
Claire Why are the polar bears becoming extinct?
Humphrey Are they?
Claire The computer models say they are.
Humphrey But the people who actually go and count them have found more than there were thirty years ago.
Jim For heaven's sake, Humphrey! If it's all such nonsense. Why does everyone believe it?...
Humphrey (amused) Hard to understand, I agree. But some scientists believe it, lots of others want the billions of pounds you can get for research that seems to show that global warming is caused by greenhouse gases, and most of the scientists who disagree can't get published. Journalists love shock-horror stories, governments want to look virtuous to the voters, lefties want a way to rubbish big oil, and it makes the tree-huggers, whale- savers, anti-capitalists and everyone at the B.BC feel holier than thou and warm and fuzzy inside. What's not to like?
Jim Why hasn't anyone else said all this?
Humphrey (chuckles) They certainly do, for all the businessmen who are getting enormous government grants for them. But there isn't enough wind to be practical. The total output of all the UK wind turbines put together is one-fifth of one decent-sized coal-fired power station.
Claire You don't believe in global warming?
Humphrey My job is not to believe or disbelieve. My job is to weigh up arguments and produce answers. That's what the Civil Service is for.
Claire To justify inactivity?
Humphrey We can't do something about everything. In fact we can't do much about anything. But I can give the Prime Minister ways of deflecting awkward questions and minimising the apparent urgency.
Claire He can't say any of this to the BBC. They'd shout him down.
Jim No, they'd let me go on as long as I liked.Then the Home Secretary would send round two men in white coats to take me away.
Claire And the BBC would film it.
Jim Claire, phone the BBC back about global warming and give them a version of number six.
Claire goes to the phone, and dials.
Claire Okey-dokey.
Jim I really think you must be misinformed somewhere. Al Gore got the Nobel Peace Prize for his work on global warming.
Humphrey So did Dr Kissinger for his work on the Vietnam War.
Jim has no answer to that.
Claire Hello? ...Robin Simpson...Claire Sutton here, from Chequers. I've talked to people here about the new global-warming forecasts. I can tell you that the government is taking the latest findings extremely seriously and is monitoring the situation as it develops.
Jim (ignoring Claire) You think it's all a scam? I can't get my head around this.
Humphrey For some people it's a scam. For most, it's just the greatest outbreak of collective hysteria since the witchcraft trials in the seventeenth century.
Bernard enters.
Bernard The Ambassador of Kumranistan, Prime Minister.
Jim I'm not ready for him. Oh God!
The Ambassador is entering.
Oh good!
The Ambassador is ideal diplomat. He has a beard, and an excellent English accent. He is urbane, courteous and never loses his cool. He is wearing silk pyjamas and a monogrammed robe. Jim greets him like long-lost friend. Claire hangs up.
Jim Ah. Your Excellency!
Ambassador Prime Minister. Please excuse my deshabille, I had just retired for rhe night when I received your summons.
Jim No problem. We're awfully casual at Chequers.
Ambassador (turns to Humphrey) Ah, Bubbles, my dear chap. It's like the old days, isn't it? Late night drinks and all that.
Jim Bubbles?
Bernard and Claire Bubbles?
Ambassador They don't know your old nickname?
Humphrey (mortified) No, they ... er ... a silly thing, Prime Minister ... I used to be partial to champagne, that's all.
Jim And this is Claire, Head of the Policy Unit at Number Ten.
Handshakes.Jim indicates that the Ambassador should sit. They all sit.
Jim I'm glad to hear that you and Bubbles are old friends.
Humphrey scowls.
Ambassador Yes indeed.
Jim So. Bernard's briefed you?
Ambassador He has.
Jim And?
Ambassador And - what?
Jim Exactly. And what?
The Ambassador looks around for guidance.
Ambassador I'm not sure that I know precisely what you are asking me.
Jim Does Mr Aitikeev mean what he says?
Ambassador Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister consults me on matters of Kumranistan's policy pertaining to the United Kingdom. Mr Aitikeev's sexual proclivities are not a matter of public policy.
Jim Did you know about his perverted tastes?
Ambassador I don't consider it my business.
Humphrey Well, unfortunately he's sort of made it our business.
Ambassador My understanding is that he asked the Prime Minister's Private Secretary to keep it confidential, and the Private Secretary agreed. Now there are five of us discussing it. (To Bernard.) Would you say you kept your word?
Humphrey Oh come on, Freddie...
Humphrey Bernard couldn't keep it confidential, could he, not after Mr Aitikeev made those threats?
Ambassador J really can't comment. I didn't hear the conversation.
Claire Your Excellency, do you think Mr Aitikeev will renege on his commitment to the pipeline contract if we cannot ... oblige ... him tonight?
Ambassador He can be stubborn.
The Brits exchange glances.
Humphrey Has this sort of ... request been made by him before?
Ambassador No. Well, yes. In Bangkok, I believe, but no one took any notice because that's par for the course there really, isn't it?
Jim Is it?
Ambassador Isn't it?
Jim Has this happened anywhere else?
Ambassador Well, Bombay, the Philippines - you know, a few third-world places but ... that's different.
Claire How so?
Ambassador It's understood.
Jim Is it?
Ambassador Isn't it?
Claire (intrigued) You're saying, child prostitution is the accepted norm in those places?
Ambassador I wouldn't know if it's accepted or the norm exactly, but it's certainly not unusual. Look, I suspect that my personal opinion is the same as yours. But I am here, not as a moralist, but as a servant of our government.
Jim So you feel you have to defend him.
Ambassador He is a member of the government, and my boss.
Jim But there are moral considerations here.
Ambassador Indeed there are. And in all fairness to Mr Aitikeev, I'm quite sure that he did not ask you to obtain a virgin for him. (Turns to Bernard.) Am I right?
Bernard is wondering if he's losing his sanity.
Bernard No, funnily enough, he didn't.
Ambassador As I thought. He'd never do that.
Jim Because?
Ambassador Moral considerations. He would not defile her. He would want a girl who has already been defiled.
Jim That's more moral?
Ambassador In our culture, once a female has been defiled she is worthless. Dishonoured. Her family will not take her back. If they do, they will kill her. Few men would marry her. Her only real future is in a brothel. As a moral society we have no tolerance for that sort of thing.
Claire Not among women, anyway.
Jim Are you suggesting that we are a less moral society: than Kumranistan?
Ambassador I would say, we are even more rigorous about purity than Great Britain, yes. But in this instance Mr Aitikeev is offering an excellent opportunity to such a girl: he's not ungenerous and I'm sure he will give her hundreds of pounds. That's better than death, wouldn't you say?
Claire Yes, but that's not the choice here. In our culture - 
Ambassador Forgive me, but I'm describing our culture. Mr Aitikeev's culture.
Jim But it's wrong.
Ambassador You say tomayto and I say romahto.
Jim What?
Ambassador You believe your values are right. So do we.
You believe you should impose your values on us. Many of my people would like to impose their values on you. I say, live and let live.
Claire Are you a Muslim?
Ambassador I'm a diplomat.
Claire Yes, I know, but apart from that what are you?
Ambassador I am a Libra. And a member of the MCC, of course.
Jim/Humphrey (doubtfully/encouragingly) Well, that's good ...

